README.md, before:

# Minishell -- Feature summary

## 🟩 Mandatory Features
- 🟩 input prompt with history (readline, non-persistent)
- 🟩 program execution based on `PATH`
- 🟩 single quotes and double quotes
- 🟩 parameter expansion (`$name` format), also in double quotes
- 🟩 redirections (`<, >, <<, >>`)
- 🟩 anonymous pipes (`|`)
- 🟩 `$?` special parameter for the exit status of the most recent pipeline
- 🟩 handling of `SIGINT` (`C-c`), `SIGQUIT` (`C-\`), and `EOT` (`C-d`) in all modes
- 🟩 some builtins (`echo with -n, cd, pwd, export, unset, exit, env`)
- 🟩 0 memory/fd leaks and memory corruptions

## 🟩 Bonus features
- 🟩 AND (`&&` and OR (`||`) lists
- 🟩 parenthesis (`(` and `)`) for priorities
- 🟩 globbing (`*`) for the current working directory

## 🟧 Additional features (not required by the subject)
❗ Features marked with `(!)` seemed easy to implement, but turned out to be significantly harder
- 🟩 Wordsplitting after parameter expansion using multicharacter IFS (exactly like bash)
    - 🟩 try one of `unset IFS`, `IFS=`, `IFS=:`, `IFS=": "`
    - 🟩 then `A=" :one     two  three:::::four:   " && /bin/printf '"%s"\n' $A-one-$A-two-$A`
- 🟩 declare (also with `-p`) and readonly builtin
- 🟧 declare, readonly, and export without args, with correct(!) (ANSI-C-)quoting
    - 🟩 try `A='cd "$HOME" && echo "Changed dir!" || echo "Sorry $USER, no changing :("' && declare -p A`
- 🟩 normal shell variables (no flags) (`declare A=1`, `A=1`)
- 🟩 readonly variables (`declare -r A=1`, `readonly B=1`)
- 🟩 unset, yet declared variables (`declare A`, `export X`)
- 🟩 different prompts (`PS0`, `PS1`, `PS2`, `PS4`)
- 🟩 prompt expansion (`\u, \w, \W, \h, \H, \$`)
- 🟩 fallback mechanisms for username resolution in prompt
    1. 🟩 manual parsing of the binary Kerberos credential cache file (`/tmp/krb5cc_$EUID_...`)
        - 🟩 `EUID` retrieved via manual parsing of `/proc/self/status`
    2. 🟩 manual parsing of `/etc/passwd`
    3. 🟩 `EUID` env var
- 🟩 fallback mechanisms for hostname resolution in prompt (`/etc/hostname`, then `/proc/sys/kernel/hostname`)
- 🟩 creation of subshells when using parenthesis
- 🟩 sequential expansion of lists (try `A=1 && echo $A`)
- 🟩 sequential expansion of heredocs from lists (try `A=1 && cat << EOF\nA: $A\nEOF`)
- 🟩 correct handling of non-tty stdin, also for heredocs(!) (try `printf '<<EOF cat\nline\nEOF' | ./minishell`)
- 🟩 correct handling of multiline input
- 🟩 correct handling of multiline prompt
- 🟩 bash-identical implementation of the very quirky(!) `exit` builtin
    - 🟩 try `exit 9223372036854775808 1` vs. `exit 9223372036854775807 1` vs. `exit word 1`
    - 🟩 try `bash -c 'exit 42'`; `exit 1 1`; `echo $?` vs. `true`; `exit 1 1`; `echo $?`
- 🟩 handling of csh-like ambiguous redirects (with correct(!) error reporting)
- 🟥 the weird export/declare/readonly edge case (`l="ls -al" e=export ; export newls=$l ; $e newls2=$l ; echo "newls:$newls" ; echo "newls2:$newls2"`).
- 🟩 `?` glob character
- 🟩 additional special parameters:
    1. 🟩 `$-` expanding to the active shell options
    2. 🟩 `$$` expanding to the the current PID of the shell
    3. 🟩 `$0` to `$9` expanding to the positional arguments of minishell (specified after `-c`)
    3. 🟩 `$#` expanding to the number of positional argument
    4. 🟥 `$@` expanding to all positional argument, with word splitting when quoted
    5. 🟥 `$*` expanding to all positional argument, joining with `IFS[0]` when quoted
- 🟩 default (and automatic/special) variables
    - 🟩 PPID, _, MINISHELL_EXECUTION_STRING, LINENO/CURRENT_LINE, SHLVL
- 🟩 shift builtin without arguments
- 🟧 source builtin
- 🟩 : builtin (colon, null utility, aka null command)
- 🟩 `cd` with `-` argument
- 🟩 correct handling of:
    - 🟩 `./minishell 2>/dev/null`
    - 🟩 `./minishell 1>/dev/null`
    - 🟩 `./minishell | ./minishell | ...`
    - 🟩 `./minishell -i 2>/dev/null`
- 🟩 the following shell options (exactly like bash) and their negations (using `+`) if applicable:
    - 🟩 `-c` for an execution string with positional arguments afterwards (`$0`, `$1`, ...)
    - 🟩 `-s` to specify positional arguments (`$1`, `$2`, ...)
    - 🟩 `-l` to make minishell act as if it had been invoked as a login shell
    - 🟩 `-i` to force interactive mode (except when using `-c`)
    - 🟩 `-a` to autoexport variable assignments (allexport)
    - 🟩 `-e` to exit when a pipeline fails with a non-zero exit status (errexit, fails categorically, i.e. also in `&&` constructs, unlike bash)
    - 🟩 `-f` to disable pathname expansion (noglob)
    - 🟩 `-n` to only read command, not execute them (noexec)
    - 🟩 `-t` to exit after executing the first command line (onecmd)
    - 🟩 `-u` to treat expansion of unset parameters an error (nounset)
    - 🟩 `-v` to print every input line after it's read (verbose)
    - 🟩 `-x` to print the arguments of a command before it's executed (xtrace)
    - 🟩 `-C` to disallow overwriting of existing regular files via redirections (noclobber)
- 🟥 set builtin that can set all of the options from above (except `-s`, `-c`, `-l`, and `-i`) and set positional arguments
- 🟥 execution of scripts via arguments
- 🟩 sourcing of $HOME/.mshrc if it exists
- 🟩 when invoked with `-l` or the first character of argv0 is a hyphen (`-`) (login shell)
    - 🟩 sourcing of $HOME/.msh_profile if it exists
- 🟥 handling of line continuations in the following contexts:
    - 🟥 unfinished single quote
    - 🟥 unfinished double quote
    - 🟥 escaped newline
    - 🟥 unfinished subshell
    - 🟥 unfinished pipeline
    - 🟥 unfinished control operator (`&&`, `||`)
    - 🟥 here-documents
- 🟩 The exlamation point (`!`) reserved word for negation of the exit status of a pipeline
    - work categorically, i.e. also in && constructs, unlike bash
    - allows for empty pipelines (i.e. `! || ! ! ; !`)
- 🟩 comments using the hash symbol (`#`)
- 🟩 the semicolon control operator (`;`)
- 🟩 handling of backslash-escaping in unquoted and double-quoted contexts
- 🟩 Error redirection using `2>` and `2>>`
- 🟩 inheriting and respecting of umask (tho you can't change it :P)
- 🟩 assignment words (basic implementation, not allowed with non-assignment-words)
    - try `A=1 B=2 C=3 ; declare -p A B C`
- 🟥 heredocs in the history
- 🟥 ANSI C quoting

## 🟩 Notable implementation details
- 🟩 optional(!) garbage collection with custom(!) contexts
- 🟩 use of hashtables (`fnv-1a` hash algorithm)
- 🟩 0-declaration iterators for the circular deques (the main datastructure)
- 🟩 ft_getopt (including `+` options) (try `declare -prxxx +x +r -xrpxprpxp -- VAR=1 X`)
- 🟩 LL(1) grammar and parser
- 🟩 AST with tagged unions
- 🟩 generic deque implementation using tagged unions
- 🟩 functions similar to mktemp, gethostname, getpid, getuid, getusername, getumask
- 🟩 Not inheriting IFS to prevent exploits

# 🟩 Generate locale-specific whitespace
The requirements for this project disallow the use of `isspace(3)`, which respects
the current `locale(7)`. However, we need this locale information if we want to
do word splitting correctly, since the `IFS` whitespace defintion is determined
from the `LC_CTYPE` "space" character class, which in turn inherits `" \f\n\r\t\v"` (`locale(5)`).
Other locales, like `am_ET` define further whitespace in this class.

We can obtain all the ASCII characters which are whitespace in the current locale
by defining them in a header. To obtain them, one can leverage C or POSIX sh:
```sh
#! /bin/sh

true Find suitable dump command                                                             &&#
    { command -v xxd                                                                        &&#
    dump='xxd -ps -c1'                                                                      ||#
    { command -v hexdump                                                                    &&#
    dump="hexdump -ve '/1 "'"'"%02x\n"'"'"'"                                                ||#
    { command -v od                                                                         &&#
    dump='od -An -vtx1 -w1 | cut -c2-'                                                      ||#
    { command -v printf                                                                     &&#
    dump='while LC_ALL=POSIX IFS= read -r -d "" -n 1 byte; do printf "%02X\n" "'"'"'$byte"; done' ||#
    dump='printf "\033[31m%s\033[m\n" "No dumper (not event printf?) found, please install either xxd, hexdump, or od. Providing default locale." >/dev/tty | printf "20\n09\n0a\n0b\n0c\n0d"'; }; }; }; } 2>/dev/null 1>&2

2>/dev/null 1>&2 command -v locale && . /dev/stdin << LOCALE
$(locale)
LOCALE
[ -n "${LC_CTYPE}" ] && locale_info=" /* LC_CTYPE="'"'"${LC_CTYPE}"'" */' || locale_info=

printf '\n'
for i in {1..127}; do
    char="$(printf "\\$(printf '%03o' "$i").")"
    case "${char%.}" in [^[:space:]]) false;; esac && printf "%s" "${char%.}" # [:space:] character class respects the locale
done | eval "$dump" | sed 's/^/\\x/' | tr -d '\n' | sed 's/^/# define IFS_WHITESPACE "/; s|$|"'"${locale_info}"'\n|'
```

Commit message:

Update README.md, mark things that are hard

README.md, after:

# Minishell -- Feature summary

## 🟩 Mandatory Features
- 🟩 input prompt with history (readline, non-persistent)
- 🟩 program execution based on `PATH`
- 🟩 single quotes and double quotes
- 🟩 parameter expansion (`$name` format), also in double quotes
- 🟩 redirections (`<, >, <<, >>`)
- 🟩 anonymous pipes (`|`)
- 🟩 `$?` special parameter for the exit status of the most recent pipeline
- 🟩 handling of `SIGINT` (`C-c`), `SIGQUIT` (`C-\`), and `EOT` (`C-d`) in all modes
- 🟩 some builtins (`echo with -n, cd, pwd, export, unset, exit, env`)
- 🟩 0 memory/fd leaks and memory corruptions

## 🟩 Bonus features
- 🟩 AND (`&&` and OR (`||`) lists
- 🟩 parenthesis (`(` and `)`) for priorities
- 🟩 globbing (`*`) for the current working directory

## 🟧 Additional features (not required by the subject)
❗ Features marked with `(!)` seemed easy to implement, but turned out to be significantly harder
❗ Occasionally, they might also mark features that are almost always implemented incorrectly

- 🟩 Wordsplitting after parameter expansion using multicharacter IFS (exactly(!) like bash)
    - 🟩 try one of `unset IFS`, `IFS=`, `IFS=:`, `IFS=": "`
    - 🟩 then `A=" :one     two  three:::::four:   " && /bin/printf '"%s"\n' $A-one-$A-two-$A`
- 🟩 declare (also with `-p`) and readonly (special) builtin
- 🟧 declare, readonly, and export without args, with correct(!) (ANSI-C-)quoting
    - 🟩 try `A='cd "$HOME" && echo "Changed dir!" || echo "Sorry $USER, no changing :("' && declare -p A`
- 🟩 normal shell variables (no flags) (`declare A=1`, `A=1`)
- 🟩 readonly variables (`declare -r A=1`, `readonly B=1`)
- 🟩 unset, yet declared variables (`declare A`, `export X`)
- 🟩 different prompts (`PS0`, `PS1`, `PS2`, `PS4`)
- 🟩 prompt expansion (`\u, \w, \W, \h, \H, \$`)
- 🟩 fallback mechanisms for username resolution in prompt
    1. 🟩 manual(!) parsing of the binary Kerberos credential cache file (`/tmp/krb5cc_$EUID_...`)
        - 🟩 `EUID` retrieved via manual parsing of `/proc/self/status`
    2. 🟩 manual parsing of `/etc/passwd`
    3. 🟩 `EUID` env var
- 🟩 fallback mechanisms for hostname resolution in prompt (`/etc/hostname`, then `/proc/sys/kernel/hostname`)
- 🟩 creation of subshells when using parenthesis
- 🟩 sequential(!) expansion of lists (try `A=1 && echo $A`)
- 🟩 sequential(!) expansion of heredocs from lists (try `A=1 && cat << EOF\nA: $A\nEOF`)
- 🟩 correct handling of non-tty stdin, also for heredocs(!) (try `printf '<<EOF cat\nline\nEOF' | ./minishell`)
- 🟩 correct(!) handling of multiline input
- 🟩 correct(!) handling of multiline prompt
- 🟩 bash-identical implementation of the very quirky(!) `exit` special builtin
    - 🟩 try `exit 9223372036854775808 1` vs. `exit 9223372036854775807 1` vs. `exit word 1`
    - 🟩 try `bash -c 'exit 42'`; `exit 1 1`; `echo $?` vs. `true`; `exit 1 1`; `echo $?`
- 🟩 handling of csh-like ambiguous redirects(!) (with correct(!) error reporting)
- 🟥 the weird export/declare/readonly edge case(!) (`l="ls -al" e=export ; export newls=$l ; $e newls2=$l ; echo "newls:$newls" ; echo "newls2:$newls2"`).
- 🟩 `?` glob character
- 🟩 additional special parameters:
    1. 🟩 `$-` expanding to the active shell options
    2. 🟩 `$$` expanding to the the current PID of the shell
    3. 🟩 `$0` to `$9` expanding to the positional arguments of minishell (specified after `-c`)
    3. 🟩 `$#` expanding to the number of positional argument
    4. 🟥 `$@` expanding to all positional argument, with word splitting when quoted
    5. 🟥 `$*` expanding to all positional argument, joining with `IFS[0]` when quoted
- 🟩 default (and automatic/special) variables
    - 🟩 PPID, _, MINISHELL_EXECUTION_STRING, LINENO/CURRENT_LINE, SHLVL
- 🟩 shift special builtin without arguments
- 🟧 source special builtin(!)
- 🟩 : special builtin (colon, null utility, aka null command)
- 🟩 `cd` with `-` argument
- 🟩 correct(!) handling of:
    - 🟩 `./minishell 2>/dev/null`
    - 🟩 `./minishell 1>/dev/null`
    - 🟩 `./minishell | ./minishell | ...`
    - 🟩 `./minishell -i 2>/dev/null`
- 🟩 the following shell options (exactly like bash) and their negations (using `+`) if applicable:
    - 🟩 `-c` for an execution string with positional arguments afterwards (`$0`, `$1`, ...)
    - 🟩 `-s` to specify positional arguments (`$1`, `$2`, ...)
    - 🟩 `-l` to make minishell act as if it had been invoked as a login shell
    - 🟩 `-i` to force interactive mode (except when using `-c`)
    - 🟩 `-a` to autoexport variable assignments (allexport)
    - 🟩 `-e` to exit when a pipeline fails with a non-zero exit status (errexit, fails categorically, i.e. also in `&&` constructs, unlike bash)
    - 🟩 `-f` to disable pathname expansion (noglob)
    - 🟩 `-n` to only read command, not execute them (noexec)
    - 🟩 `-t` to exit after executing the first command line (onecmd)
    - 🟩 `-u` to treat expansion of unset parameters an error (nounset)
    - 🟩 `-v` to print every input line after it's read (verbose)
    - 🟩 `-x` to print the arguments of a command before it's executed (xtrace)
    - 🟩 `-C` to disallow overwriting of existing regular files via redirections (noclobber)
- 🟥 set special builtin that can set all of the options from above (except `-s`, `-c`, `-l`, and `-i`) and set positional arguments
- 🟥 execution of scripts via arguments
- 🟩 sourcing of $HOME/.mshrc if it exists
- 🟩 when invoked with `-l` or the first character of argv0 is a hyphen (`-`) (login shell)
    - 🟩 sourcing of $HOME/.msh_profile if it exists
- 🟥 handling of line continuations in the following contexts:
    - 🟥 unfinished single quote
    - 🟥 unfinished double quote
    - 🟥 escaped newline
    - 🟥 unfinished subshell
    - 🟥 unfinished pipeline
    - 🟥 unfinished control operator (`&&`, `||`)
    - 🟥 here-documents
- 🟩 The exlamation point (`!`) reserved word for negation of the exit status of a pipeline
    - work categorically, i.e. also in && constructs, unlike bash
    - allows for empty pipelines (i.e. `! || ! ! ; !`)
- 🟩 comments using the hash symbol (`#`)
- 🟩 the semicolon control operator (`;`)
- 🟩 handling of backslash-escaping in unquoted and double-quoted contexts
- 🟩 Error redirection using `2>` and `2>>`
- 🟩 inheriting and respecting of umask (tho you can't change it :P)
- 🟩 assignment words (basic implementation, not allowed with non-assignment-words)
    - try `A=1 B=2 C=3 ; declare -p A B C`
- 🟥 heredocs in the history
- 🟥 ANSI C quoting(!)

## 🟩 Notable implementation details
- 🟩 optional garbage collection with custom(!) contexts
- 🟩 use of hashtables (`fnv-1a` hash algorithm)
- 🟩 0-declaration iterators for the circular deques (the main datastructure)
- 🟩 ft_getopt (including `+` options) (try `declare -prxxx +x +r -xrpxprpxp -- VAR=1 X`)
- 🟩 LL(1) grammar and parser
- 🟩 AST with tagged unions
- 🟩 generic deque implementation using tagged unions
- 🟩 functions similar to mktemp, gethostname, getpid, getuid, getusername, getumask
- 🟩 Not inheriting IFS to prevent exploits

# 🟩 Generate locale-specific whitespace
The requirements for this project disallow the use of `isspace(3)`, which respects
the current `locale(7)`. However, we need this locale information if we want to
do word splitting correctly, since the `IFS` whitespace defintion is determined
from the `LC_CTYPE` "space" character class, which in turn inherits `" \f\n\r\t\v"` (`locale(5)`).
Other locales, like `am_ET` define further whitespace in this class.

We can obtain all the ASCII characters which are whitespace in the current locale
by defining them in a header. To obtain them, one can leverage C or POSIX sh:
```sh
#! /bin/sh

true Find suitable dump command                                                             &&#
    { command -v xxd                                                                        &&#
    dump='xxd -ps -c1'                                                                      ||#
    { command -v hexdump                                                                    &&#
    dump="hexdump -ve '/1 "'"'"%02x\n"'"'"'"                                                ||#
    { command -v od                                                                         &&#
    dump='od -An -vtx1 -w1 | cut -c2-'                                                      ||#
    { command -v printf                                                                     &&#
    dump='while LC_ALL=POSIX IFS= read -r -d "" -n 1 byte; do printf "%02X\n" "'"'"'$byte"; done' ||#
    dump='printf "\033[31m%s\033[m\n" "No dumper (not event printf?) found, please install either xxd, hexdump, or od. Providing default locale." >/dev/tty | printf "20\n09\n0a\n0b\n0c\n0d"'; }; }; }; } 2>/dev/null 1>&2

2>/dev/null 1>&2 command -v locale && . /dev/stdin << LOCALE
$(locale)
LOCALE
[ -n "${LC_CTYPE}" ] && locale_info=" /* LC_CTYPE="'"'"${LC_CTYPE}"'" */' || locale_info=

printf '\n'
for i in {1..127}; do
    char="$(printf "\\$(printf '%03o' "$i").")"
    case "${char%.}" in [^[:space:]]) false;; esac && printf "%s" "${char%.}" # [:space:] character class respects the locale
done | eval "$dump" | sed 's/^/\\x/' | tr -d '\n' | sed 's/^/# define IFS_WHITESPACE "/; s|$|"'"${locale_info}"'\n|'
```
